- 4.2 Static semantics

	We start with the rules for forming types and contexts, which are listed in Figure 13.

	We use the syntax ` δ(s1, . . . , sn) to indicate that we can construct a type δ(I1, . . . , In) when given type index terms I1, . . . , In of sorts s1, . . . , sn, respectively.

	----

	A judgment of the form φ ` τ [type] means that τ is a well-formed type under the index context φ, and a judgment of the form φ ` Γ [ctx] means that Γ is a well-formed (expression) context under φ.

	The domain dom(Γ) of a context Γ is defined to be the set of variables declared in Γ.

	We write φ; P~ |= P0 for a regular constraint relation in the fixed type index language L.

	----

	In λΠ,Σ pat , type equality, that is, equality between types, is defined in terms of the static subtype relation ≤s tp:

	We say that τ and τ0 are equal if both τ ≤s tp τ0 and τ0 ≤s tp τ hold.

	By overloading |=, we use φ; P~ |= τ ≤s tp τ0 for a static subtype judgment and present the rules for deriving such a judgment in Figure 14.

	Note that all of these rules are syntax-directed.
	
	----

	The static subtype relation ≤s tp is often too weak in practice.

	For instance, we may need to use a function of the type τ1 = Πa:int. int(a) → int(a) as a function of the type τ2 = (Σa :int. int(a)) → (Σa :int. int(a)), but it is clear that τ1 ≤s tp τ2 does not hold (as ≤s tp is syntax-directed).

	We are to introduce in Section 4.6 another subtype relation ≤d tp, which is much stronger than ≤s tp and is given the name dynamic subtype relation.

	----

	The following lemma, which is parallel to Lemma 3.1, essentially states that the rules in Figure 14 are closed under substitution.

	- Lemma 4.1

		1. If φ, φ0; P~ |= τ ≤s
			tp τ
			0
			is derivable and φ ` Θ : φ0 holds, then φ; P~ [Θ] |=
			τ [Θ] ≤s
			tp τ
			0
			[Θ] is also derivable.

		2. If φ; P~ , P~
			0 |= τ ≤s
			tp τ
			0
			is derivable and φ; P~ |= P~
			0 holds, then φ; P~ |= τ ≤s
			tp τ
			0
			is also derivable.

	- Proof

		(Sketch) (1) and (2) are proven by structural induction on the derivations of

			φ, φ0; P~ |= τ ≤s
			tp τ
			0 and φ; P~ , P~
			0 |= τ ≤s
			tp τ
			0

		, respectively.
		Lemma 3.1 is needed in the proof. □
	
	As can be expected, the static subtype relation is both reflexive and transitive.

	- Proposition 4.2 (Reflexitivity and Transitivity of ≤s tp)

		1. φ; P~ |= τ ≤s
			tp τ holds for each τ such that φ ` τ [type] is derivable.
		2. φ; P~ |= τ1 ≤s
			tp τ3 holds if φ; P~ |= τ1 ≤s
			tp τ2 and φ; P~ |= τ2 ≤s
			tp τ3 do.
	- Proof

		Straightforward. □

	We now present the typing rules for patterns in Figure 15 and then the typing rules for expressions in Figure 16 and Figure 17.

	----

	The typing judgments for patterns are of the form p ↓ τ ⇒ (φ; P~; Γ), and the rules for deriving such judgments are given in Figure 15.

	A judgment of the form p ↓ τ ⇒ (φ; P~ ; Γ) means that for any value v of the type τ , if v matches p, that is, match(v, p) ⇒ θ holds for some substitution θ, then there exists an index substitution Θ such that ∅ ` Θ : φ, ∅; ∅ |= P~ [Θ] and (∅; ∅; ∅) ` θ : Γ[Θ].

	This is captured precisely by Lemma 4.10. In the rule (pat-prod), it is required that φ1 and φ2 share no common index variables in their domains.

	In the rule (pat-const), we write φ0; P~0 ` cc(τ ) : δ(I1, . . . , In) to mean that cc is a constant constructor assigned (according to some signature for constants) the following c-type:

		Πφ0.P~
		0 ⊃ (τ ⇒ δ(I1, . . . , In))

	In other words, given a constant constructor cc, we can form a rule (pat-const) for this particular cc based on the c-type assigned to cc.

	----

	The typing rules given in Figure 16 are mostly expected.

	The rule (ty-clause) requires that τ2 contain only type index variables declared in φ.

	For universal dependent types, existential dependent types, guarded types, and assertion types, the typing rules are given in Figure 17.

	Note that we have omitted certain obvious side conditions that need to be attached to some of these rules.

	For instance, in the rule (ty-Π-intro), the type index variable a is assumed to have no free occurrences in either P~ or Γ.

	Also, in the rule (ty-Σ-elim), the type index variable a is assumed to have no free occurrences in either P~, Γ or τ2.

	We now briefly go over some of the typing rules in Figure 17.

	- If a value v can be assigned a type τ under an assumption P, then the typing rule (ty-⊃-intro) assigns ⊃+(v) the guarded type P ⊃ τ .
		Notice the presence of value restriction here.
	- Given an expression e of type P ⊃ τ , the typing rule (ty-⊃-elim) states that the expression ⊃−(e) can be formed if the proposition P holds.
		Intuitively, a guarded expression is useful only if the guard can be discharged.
	- If e can be assigned a type τ and P holds, then the typing rule (ty-∧-intro) assigns ∧(e) the asserting type P ∧ τ .

	- The elimination rule for the type constructor ∧ is (ty-∧-elim).
		Assume that e2 can be assigned a type τ2 under the assumption that P holds and x is of type τ1.
	- If e1 is given the asserting type P ∧ τ1, then the rule (ty-∧-elim) assigns the type τ2 to the expression let ∧ (x) = e1 in e2 end.
		Clearly, this rule resembles the treatment of existentially quantified packages (Mitchell & Plotkin, 1988).

	The following lemma is parallel to Lemma 2.1. We need to make use of the assumption that the constraint relation involved here is regular when proving the first two statements in this lemma.

	- Lemma 4.3 (Thinning)

		Assume D :: φ; P~ ; Γ ` e : τ .

		1. For every index variable a that is not declared in φ, we have a derivation D0 :: φ, a : s; P~ ; Γ ` e : τ such that height(D) = height(D0).
		2. For every P such that φ ` P : bool is derivable, we have a derivation D0 :: φ; P~, P; Γ ` e : τ such that height(D) = height(D0).
		3. For every variable xf that is not declared in Γ and τ0 such that φ ` τ0[type] is derivable, we have a derivation D0:: φ; P~ ; Γ, xf : τ0 ` e : τ such that height(D) = height(D0).

	- Proof

		Straightforward. □

	The following lemma indicates a close relation between the type of a closed value in λΠ,Σ pat and the form of the value, which is needed in the proof of Theorem 4.12, the Progress Theorem for λΠ,Σ pat .

	- Lemma 4.4 (Canonical Forms)

		Assume that ∅; ∅; ∅ ` v : τ is derivable.

		1. If τ = δ(~I) for some type family δ, then v is of the form cc(v0), where cc is a constant constructor assigned a c-type of the form Πφ.P~ ⊃ (τ0 ⇒ δ(~I0)).
		2. If τ = 1, then v is hi.
		3. If τ = τ1 ∗ τ2, then v is of the form <v1, v2>.
		4. If τ = τ1 → τ2, then v is of the form lamx. e.
		5. If τ = P ⊃ τ0, then v is of the form ⊃+(v0).
		6. If τ = Πa:s. τ0, then v is of the form Π+(v0).
		7. If τ = P ∧ τ0, then v is of the form ∧(v0).
		8. If τ = Σa:s. τ0, then v is of the form Σ(v0).

	- Proof

		By a thorough inspection of the typing rules in Figure 16 and Figure 17. □

	Clearly, the following rule is admissible in λΠ,Σ pat as it is equivalent to the rule (ty-var) followed by the rule (ty-sub):

		φ ` Γ [ctx] Γ(xf) = τ φ; P~ |= τ ≤s
		tp τ
		0
		φ; P~ ; Γ ` xf : τ
		0
		(ty-var’)

	In the following presentation, we retire the rule (ty-var) and simply replace it with the rule (ty-var’).

	The following technical lemma is needed for establishing Lemma 4.6.

	- Lemma 4.5

			Assume D :: φ; P~; Γ, xf : τ1 ` e : τ2. If φ; P~ |= τ
			0
			1 ≤s
			tp τ1, then there exists D0
			::
			φ; P~ ; Γ, xf : τ
			0
			1 ` e : τ2 such that height(D) = height(D0
			).

	- Proof

		(Sketch) By structural induction on the derivation D.

		We need to make use of the fact that the rule (ty-var) is replaced with the rule (ty-var’) in order to show height(D) = height(D0). □

	The following lemma is needed in the proof of Theorem 4.11, the Subject Reduction Theorem for λΠ,Σ pat .

	- Lemma 4.6

		Assume D :: φ; P~; Γ ` v : τ . Then there exists a derivation D0 :: φ; P~ ; Γ ` v : τ such that height(D0) ≤ height(D) and the last typing rule applied in D0 is not (ty-sub).

	- Proof

		(Sketch) The proof proceeds by structural induction on D.

		When handling the case where the last applied rule in D is (ty-lam), we make use of Lemma 4.5 and thus see the need for replacing (ty-var) with (ty-var’). □

	Note that the value v in Lemma 4.6 cannot be replaced with an arbitrary expression.

	For instance, if we replace v with an expression of the form Π−(e), then the lemma cannot be proven.

	----

	The following lemma plays a key role in the proof of Theorem 4.11, the Subject Reduction Theorem for λΠ,Σ pat .

	- Lemma 4.7 (Substitution)

		1. Assume that φ, φ0; P~ ; Γ ` e : τ is derivable. If φ ` Θ : φ0 holds, then φ; P~[Θ]; Γ[Θ] ` e : τ [Θ] is also derivable.
		2. Assume that φ; P~ , P~0; Γ ` e : τ is derivable. If φ; P~ |= P~0 holds, then φ; P~ ; Γ `e : τ is also derivable.
		3. Assume that φ; P~ ; Γ, Γ0 ` e : τ is derivable. If φ; P~; Γ ` θ : Γ0 holds, then φ; P~; Γ ` e[θ] : τ is also derivable.

	- Proof

		(Sketch) All (1), (2) and (3) are proven straightforwardly by structural induction on the derivations of the typing judgments φ, φ0; P~ ; Γ ` e : τ , and φ; P~ , P~0; Γ ` e : τ , and φ; P~; Γ, Γ0 ` e : τ , respectively. □
