- 4.4 Type soundness

	In order to establish the type soundness for λΠ,Σ pat , we make the following assumption:

	For each constant function cf assigned c-type Πφ.P~ ⊃ (τ ⇒ δ(~I)), if ∅; ∅ |= P~ [Θ] holds for some substitution Θ satisfying ∅ |- Θ : φ and ∅; ∅; ∅ |- v : τ [Θ] is derivable and cf(v) is defined to be v0, then ∅; ∅; ∅ |- v0 : δ(~I[Θ]) is also derivable.

	In other words, we assume that each constant function meets its specification.
	That is, each constant function respects its c-type assignment.

	- Theorem 4.11 (Subject Reduction)

		Assume ∅; ∅; ∅ |- e1 : τ and e1 ,→ev e2.
		Then ∅; ∅; ∅ |- e2 : τ is also derivable.

		- Proof

			A completed proof of this theorem is given in Appendix B. □

	- Theorem 4.12 (Progress)

		Assume that ∅; ∅; ∅ |- e1 : τ is derivable. Then there are only four possibilities:

		- e1 is a value, or
		- e1 is in M-form, or
		- e1 is in U-form, or
		- e1 ,→ev e2 holds for some expression e2.

		In particular, this implies that e1 cannot be in E-form.

		- Proof

			(Sketch) The proof immediately follows from structural induction on the derivation of ∅; ∅; ∅ |- e1 : τ .
			Lemma 4.4 plays a key role in this proof. □

	By Theorem 4.11 and Theorem 4.12, we can readily claim that for a well-typed closed expression e in λΠ,Σ pat , either e evaluates to a value, or e evaluates to an expression in M-form, or e evaluates to an expression in U-form, or e evaluates forever.

	----

	When compared to λpat, it is interesting to see what progress we have made in λΠ,Σ pat .
	We may now assign a more accurate type to a constant functions cf to eliminate the occurrences of undefined cf(v) for certain values v.
	For instance, if the division function on integers is assigned the following c-type:

		Πa1 :int.Πa2 :int. (a2 /= 0) ⊃ (int(a1) ∗ int(a2) ⇒ int(a1/a2))

	then division by zero causes to a type error and thus can never occur at run-time.
	Similarly, we may now assign a more accurate type to a function to eliminate some occurrences of expressions of the form case v of ms that are not ev-redexes.
	For instance, when applied to two lists of unequal length, the function zip in Figure 18 evaluates to some expression of the form E[case v of ms] where case v of ms is not an ev-redex.
	If we annotate the definition of zip with the following type annotation,

		withtype {n:nat} ’a list (n) * ’b list (n) -> (’a * ’b) list (n)

	that is, we assign zip the following type (which requires the feature of parametric polymorphism that we are to introduce in Section 6):

		∀α1.∀α2.Πa:nat. (α1)list(a) ∗ (α2)list(a) → (α1 ∗ α2)list(a)

	then zip can no longer be applied to two lists of unequal length.
	In short, we can now use dependent types to eliminate various (but certainly not all) occurrences of expressions in M-form or U-form, which would not have been possible previously.

	----

	Now suppose that we have two lists xs and ys of unknown length, that is, they are of the type Σa:nat. (τ )list(a) for some type τ . In order to apply zip to xs and ys, we can insert a run-time check as follows:

		let
			val m = length (xs) and n = length (ys)
		in
			if m = n then zip (xs, ys) else raise UnequalLength
		end

	where the integer equality function = and the list length function length are assumed to be of the following types:

		=      : Πa1 :int.Πa2 :int. int(a1) ∗ int(a2) → bool(a1.= a2)
		length : ∀α.Πa:nat. (α)list(a) → int(a)

	Of course, we also have the option to implement another zip function that can directly handle lists of unequal length, but this implementation is less efficient than the one given in Figure 18.
