- 4.5 Type index erasure

	In general, there are two directions for extending a type system such as the one in ML:

	One is to extend it so that more programs can be admitted as type-correct, and the other is to extend it so that programs can be assigned more accurate types.

	In this paper, we are primarily interested in the latter as is shown below.

	----

	We can define a function | · | in Figure 19 that translates types, contexts and expressions in λΠ,Σ pat into types, contexts and expressions in λpat, respectively.

	In particular, for each type family δ in λΠ,Σ pat , we assume that there is a corresponding type δ in λpat, and for each constant c of c-type Πφ.P~ ⊃ (τ ⇒ δ(~I)) in λΠ,Σ pat , we assume that c is assigned the c-type |τ | ⇒ δ in λpat.

	- Theorem 4.13

		Assume that φ; P~ ; Γ ` e : τ is derivable in λ Π,Σ pat .
		Then |Γ| ` |e| : |τ | is derivable in λpat.

	- Proof

		(Sketch) By structural induction on the derivation of φ; P~; Γ ` e : τ . □

			|δ(
			~I)| = δ
			|1| = 1
			|τ1 ∗ τ2| = |τ1| ∗ |τ2|
			|τ1 → τ2| = |τ1| → |τ2|
			|P ⊃ τ | = |τ |
			|Πa:s. τ | = |τ |
			|P ∧ τ | = |τ |
			|Σa:s. τ | = |τ |
			|∅| = ∅
			|Γ, xf : τ | = |Γ|, xf : |τ |
			|xf | = xf
			|c(e)| = c(|e|)
			|case e of (p1 ⇒ e1 | . . . | pn ⇒ en)| = case |e| of (p1 ⇒ |e1| | . . . | pn ⇒ |en|)
			|hi| = hi
			|<e1, e2>| = h|e1|, |e2|i
			|fst(e)| = fst(|e|)
			|snd(e)| = snd(|e|)
			|lam x. e| = lamx. |e|
			|e1(e2)| = |e1|(|e2|)
			|fix f. e| = fix f. |e|
			|⊃
			+(e)| = |e|
			|⊃
			−(e)| = |e|
			|Π
			+(e)| = |e|
			|Π
			−(e)| = |e|
			| ∧(e)| = |e|
			|let ∧(x) = e1 in e2 end| = let x = |e1| in |e2| end
			|Σ(e)| = |e|
			|let Σ(x) = e1 in e2 end| = let x = |e1| in |e2| end

			Fig. 19. The erasure function | · | on types, contexts and expressions in λΠ,Σ pat

	Given a closed expression e0 in λpat, we say that e0 is typable in λpat if ∅ ` e0 : τ0 is derivable for some type τ0; and we say that e0 is typable in λΠ,Σ pat if there exists an expression e in λΠ,Σ pat such that |e| = e0 and ∅; ∅; ∅ ` e : τ is derivable for some type τ .

	Then by Theorem 4.13, we know that if an expression e in λpat is typable in λΠ,Σ pat then it is already typable in λpat. In other words, λΠ,Σ pat does not make more expressions in λpat typable.

	- Theorem 4.14

		Assume that ∅; ∅; ∅ ` e : τ is derivable.

		1. If e ,→∗
			ev v in λ
			Π,Σ
			pat , then |e| ,→∗
			ev |v| in λpat.
		2. If |e| ,→∗
			ev v0 in λpat, then there is a value v such that e ,→∗
			ev v in λ
			Π,Σ
			pat and
			|v| = v0.

	- Proof

		(Sketch) It is straightforward to prove (1). As for (2), it follows from structural induction on the derivation of ∅; ∅; ∅ ` e : τ . □

	Theorem 4.14 indicates that we can evaluate a well-typed program in λΠ,Σ pat by first erasing all the markers Π+(·), Π−(·), ⊃+(·), ⊃−(·), Σ(·) and ∧(·) in the program and then evaluating the erasure in λpat.

	Combining Theorem 4.13 and Theorem 4.14, we say that λΠ,Σ pat is a conservative extension of λpat in terms of both static and dynamic semantics.
