- 4.7 A restricted form of dependent types
	
	Generally speaking, we use the name dependent types to refer to a form of types that correspond to formulas in some first-order many-sorted logic. For instance, the following type in λΠ,Σ pat :

		Πa:int. a ≥ 0 ⊃ (int(a) → int(a + a))

	corresponds to the following first-order formula:

		∀a : int.a ≥ 0 ⊃ (int(a) → int(a + a))

	where int is interpreted as some predicate on integers, and both ⊃ and → stand for the implication connective in logic. However, it is not possible in λΠ,Σ pat to form a dependent type of the form Πa : τ1. τ2, which on the other hand is allowed in a expressions

		e ::= x | c(e) | case e of (p1 ⇒ e1
		| . . . pn ⇒ en
		) |
		hi | he1
		, e2
		i | fst(e) | snd(e) |
		lamx. e | lamx : τ. e | e1
		(e2
		) |
		fix f : τ. e | let x = e1
		in e2
		end |
		λa : sˆ. e | e[I] | (e : τ )
		Fig. 20. The syntax for DML0

	(full) dependent type system such as λP (Barendregt, 1992).

	To see the difficulty in supporting practical programming with such types that may depend on programs, let us recall the following rule that is needed for determining the static subtype relation ≤s tp in λΠ,Σ pat :

		φ; P~ |= I
		.= I
		0
		φ; P~ |= δ(I) ≤s
		tp δ(I
		0
		)
		If I and I
		0 are programs, then I
		.= I
		0

	is an equality on programs.

	In general, if recursion is allowed in program construction, then it is not just undecidable to determine whether two programs are equal; it is simply intractable.

	In addition, such a design means that the type system of a programming language can be rather unstable as adding a new programming feature into the programming language may significantly affect the type system.

	For instance, if some form of effect (e.g., exceptions, references) is added, then equality on programs can at best become rather intricate to define and is in general impractical to reason about.

	Currently, there are various studies aiming at addressing these difficulties in order to support full dependent types in practical programming.

	For instance, a plausible design is to separate pure expressions from potentially effectful ones by employing monads and then require that only pure expressions be used to form types.

	As for deciding equalities on (pure) expressions, the programmer may be asked to provide proofs of these equalities. Please see (McBride, n.d.; Westbrook et al., 2005) for further details.

	----
	
	We emphasize that the issue of supporting the use of dependent types in practical programming is largely not shared by Martin-L¨of’s development of constructive type theory (Martin-L¨of, 1984; Martin-L¨of, 1985), where the principal objective is to give a constructive foundation of mathematics.

	In such a pure setting, it is perfectly reasonable to define type equality in terms of equality on programs (or more accurately, proofs).
