- 5.1 The judgments and rules for elaboration

	We introduce a new form of judgment φ; P~ ` E : τ1 ≤ τ2, which we call dynamic subtype judgment.

	We may write φ; P~ ` τ1 ≤ τ2 to mean φ; P~ ` E : τ1 ≤ τ2 for some evaluation context E.

	The rules for deriving such a new form of judgment are given in Figure 21.

	We are to establish that if φ; P~ ` E : τ ≤ τ0 is derivable, then φ; P~ |= E : τ ≤d tp τ0 holds, that is, for any expression e of type τ , E[e] can be assigned the type τ0 and |e| ≤dyn |E[e]| holds.

	----

	There is another new form of judgment φ; P~; Γ ` e ↓ τ ⇒ e involved in the rule (dy-sub-prod) and the rule (dy-sub-fun), and the rules for deriving such a judgment, which we call analysis elaboration judgment, are to be presented next.
	
	----

	We actually have two forms of elaboration judgments involved in the process of elaborating expressions from DML0 to λΠ,Σ pat .

	- A synthesis elaboration judgment is of the form φ; P~; Γ ` e ↑ τ ⇒ e, which means that given φ, P~ , Γ and e, we can find a type τ and an expression e such that φ; P~ ; Γ ` e : τ is derivable and |e| ≤dyn |e| holds.
		Intuitively, τ can be thought of as being synthesized through an inspection on the structure of e.
	- An analysis elaboration judgment is of the form φ; P~ ; Γ ` e ↓ τ ⇒ e, which means that given φ; P~ ; Γ, e and τ , we can find an expression e such that φ; P~; Γ ` e : τ is derivable and |e| ≤dyn |e| holds.
	
	We use |e| for the erasure of an expression e in DML0, which is obtained from erasing in e all occurrences of the markers Π+(·), Π−(·), ⊃ +(·), ⊃ −(·), Σ(·) and ∧(·).

	The erasure function is formally defined in Figure 24.

	----

	The rules for deriving synthesis and analysis elaboration judgments are given in Figure 22 and Figure 23, respectively.

	Note that there are various occasions where the two forms of elaboration judgments meet.

	For instance, when using the rule (elab-up-app-1) to elaborate e1(e2), we may first synthesize a type τ1 → τ2 for e1 and then check e2 against τ1.

	----

	We next present some explanation on the elaboration rules.

	First and foremost, we emphasize that many elaboration rules are not syntax-directed.

	If in a case there are two or more elaboration rules applicable, the actual elaboration procedure should determine (based on some implementation strategies) which elaboration rule is to be chosen.

	We are currently not positioned to argue which implementation strategies are better than others, though we shall mention some key points about the strategies we have implemented.

	Given that the elaboration is not a form of pure type inference,1 it is difficult to even formalize the question as to whether an implementation of the elaboration is complete or not.
