- 5.2 Some explanation on synthesis elaboration rules

	The rules for synthesis elaboration judgments are presented in Figure 22.

	The purpose of the rules (elab-up-Π-elim-1) and (elab-up-Π-elim-2) is for eliminating Π quantifiers.

	For instance, let us assume that we are elaborating an expression e1 (e2), and a type of the form Πa : s. ˆ τ is already synthesized for e1; then we need to apply the rule (elab-up-Π-elim-1) so as to eliminate the Π quantifier in


	----

	1 By pure type inference, we refer to the question that asks whether a given expression in λpat is typable in λΠ,Σ pat , that is, whether a given expression in λpat can be the erasure of some typable expression in λΠ,Σ pat .

		sˆ = {a : s | P1, . . . , Pn} φ;P~ ` I : sˆ φ; P~ ; Γ ` e ↑ Πa:sˆ. τ ⇒ e
		φ; P~ ; Γ ` e ↑ τ [a 7→ I] ⇒⊃−
		n (Π−(e))
		(elab-up-Π-elim-1)
		sˆ = {a : s | P1, . . . , Pn} φ;P~ ` I : sˆ φ; P~ ; Γ ` e ↑ Πa:sˆ. τ ⇒ e
		φ;P~ ; Γ ` e[I] ↑ τ [a 7→ I] ⇒⊃−
		n (Π−(e))
		(elab-up-Π-elim-2)
		sˆ = {a : s | P1, . . . ,Pn} φ, a : s;P~ ,P1, . . . ,Pn; Γ ` e ↑ τ ⇒ e
		φ;P~ ; Γ ` λa : s. ˆ e ↑ Πa:s. ˆ τ ⇒ Π+(⊃
		+
		n (e))
		(elab-up-Π-intro)
		φ;P~ ; Γ ` e ↓ τ ⇒ e
		φ; P~ ; Γ ` (e : τ ) ↑ τ ⇒ e
		(elab-up-anno)
		φ ` Γ [ctx] Γ(xf ) = τ
		φ; P~ ; Γ ` xf ↑ τ ⇒ xf
		(elab-up-var)
		φ0; P~0 ` c(τ0) : δ(I~0) φ ` Θ : φ0 φ |= P~0[Θ] φ;P~ ; Γ ` e ↓ τ0[Θ] ⇒ e
		φ; P~ ; Γ ` c(e) ↑ δ(I~0[Θ]) ⇒ c(e)
		(elab-up-const)
		φ;P~ ; Γ ` e1
		↑ τ1 ⇒ e1 φ;P~ ; Γ ` e2
		↑ τ2 ⇒ e2
		φ;P~ ; Γ ` he1
		, e2
		i ↑ τ1 ∗ τ2 ⇒ <e1, e2>
		(elab-up-prod)
		φ;P~ ; Γ ` e ↑ τ1 ∗ τ2 ⇒ e
		φ;P~ ; Γ ` fst(e) ↑ τ1 ⇒ fst(e)
		(elab-up-fst)
		φ;P~ ; Γ ` e ↑ τ1 ∗ τ2 ⇒ e
		φ;P~ ; Γ ` snd(e) ↑ τ2 ⇒ snd(e)
		(elab-up-snd)
		φ; P~ ; Γ, x : τ1 ` e ↑ τ2 ⇒ lamx. e
		φ;P~ ; Γ ` lamx : τ1. e ↑ τ1 → τ2 ⇒ lamx. e
		(elab-up-lam)
		φ;P~ ; Γ ` e1
		↑ τ1 → τ2 ⇒ e1 φ;P~ ; Γ ` e2
		↓ τ1 ⇒ e2
		φ;P~ ; Γ ` e1
		(e2
		) ↑ τ2 ⇒ e1(e2)
		(elab-up-app-1)
		φ;P~ ; Γ ` e1
		↑ τ ⇒ e1 φ;P~ ; Γ ` e2
		↑ τ1 ⇒ e2
		φ;P~ ; x1 : τ, x2 : τ1 ` x1(x2) ↑ τ2 ⇒ e
		φ; P~ ; Γ ` e1
		(e2
		) ↑ τ2 ⇒ let x1 = e1 in let x2 = e2 in e end end
		(elab-up-app-2)
		φ;P~ ; Γ, f : τ ` e ↓ τ ⇒ e
		φ;P~ ; Γ ` fix f : τ. e ↑ τ ⇒ fix f. e
		(elab-up-fix)
		φ;P~ ; Γ ` e1
		↑ τ1 ⇒ e1 φ;P~ ; Γ, x : τ1 ` e2
		↑ τ2 ⇒ e2
		φ;P~ ; Γ ` let x = e1
		in e2
		end ↑ τ2 ⇒ let x = e1 in e2 end
		(elab-up-let)
		φ;P~ ; Γ, x1 : τ1, x2 : τ2 ` e[x 7→ hx1, x2i] ↑ τ ⇒ e
		φ;P~ ; Γ, x : τ1 ∗ τ2 ` e ↑ τ ⇒ let hx1, x2i = x in e end
		(elab-up-prod-left)
		sˆ = {a : s | P1, . . . ,Pn} φ, a : s;P~ ,P1, . . . ,Pn; Γ, x : τ1 ` e ↑ τ2 ⇒ e
		φ;P~ ; Γ, x : Σa:s. ˆ τ1 ` e ↑ Σa:s. ˆ τ2 ⇒ let Σ(∧n(x)) = x in Σ(∧n(e)) end
		(elab-up-Σ-left)

		Fig. 22. The rules for synthesis elaboration from DML0 to λΠ,Σ pat

	Πa : s. ˆ τ ; we continue to do so until the synthesized type for e1 does not begin with a Π quantifier. 

	In some (rare) occasions, the programmer may write e[I] to indicate an explicit elimination of a Π quantifier, and the rule (elab-up-Π-elim-2) is designed for this purpose.

	----

	The rule (elab-up-anno) turns a need for a synthesis elaboration judgment into
	
		sˆ = {a : s | P1, . . . ,Pn} φ, a : s;P~ , P1, . . . , Pn; Γ ` e ↓ τ ⇒ e
		φ; P~ ; Γ ` e ↓ Πa:s. ˆ τ ⇒ Π+(⊃
		+
		n (e))
		(elab-dn-Π-intro)
		φ;P~ ; Γ ` e1
		↓ τ1 ⇒ e1 φ;P~ ; Γ ` e2
		↓ τ2 ⇒ e2
		φ; P~ ; Γ ` he1
		, e2
		i ↓ τ1 ∗ τ2 ⇒ <e1, e2>
		(elab-dn-prod)
		φ;P~ ; Γ, x : τ1 ` e ↓ τ2 ⇒ lamx. e
		φ;P~ ; Γ ` lamx. e ↓ τ1 → τ2 ⇒ lamx. e
		(elab-dn-lam)
		p ↓ τ1 ⇒ (φ0;P~0; Γ0) φ, φ0;P~ ,P~0; Γ, Γ0 ` e ↓ τ2 ⇒ e
		φ; P~ ; Γ ` (p ⇒ e) ↓ (τ1 → τ2) ⇒ (p ⇒ e)
		(elab-dn-clause)
		φ; P~ ; Γ ` (pi ⇒ ei
		) ↓ (τ1 → τ2) ⇒ (pi ⇒ ei) for 1 ≤ i ≤ n
		ms = (p1 ⇒ e1
		| . . . | pn ⇒ en
		) ms = (p1 ⇒ e1 | . . . | pn ⇒ en)
		φ;P~ ; Γ ` ms ↓ τ1 → τ2 ⇒ ms
		(elab-dn-clause-seq)
		φ;P~ ; Γ ` e ↑ τ1 ⇒ e φ;P~ ; Γ ` ms ↓ τ1 → τ2 ⇒ ms
		φ; P~ ; Γ ` case e of ms ↓ τ2 ⇒ case e of ms
		(elab-dn-case)
		φ;P~ ; Γ ` e ↑ τ1 ⇒ e φ;P~ ` E : τ1 ≤ τ2
		φ;P~ ; Γ ` e ↓ τ2 ⇒ E[e]
		(elab-dn-up)
		φ; P~ ; Γ, x1 : τ1, x2 : τ2 ` e[x 7→ hx1, x2i] ↓ τ ⇒ e
		φ; P~ ; Γ, x : τ1 ∗ τ2 ` e ↓ τ ⇒ let hx1, x2i = x in e end
		(elab-dn-prod-left)
		sˆ = {a : s | P1, . . . ,Pn} φ, a : s;P~ , P1, . . . , Pn; Γ, x : τ1 ` e ↓ τ2 ⇒ e
		φ;P~ ; Γ, x : Σa:s. ˆ τ1 ` e ↓ τ2 ⇒ let Σ(∧n(x)) = x in e end
		(elab-dn-Σ-left)

	- Fig. 23. The rules for analysis elaboration from DML0 to λ

		Π,Σ
		pat
		|xf | = xf
		|c(e)| = c(|e|)
		|case e of (p1 ⇒ e1
		| . . . | pn ⇒ en
		)| = case |e| of (p1 ⇒ |e1
		| | . . . | pn ⇒ |en
		|)
		|hi| = hi
		|he1
		, e2
		i| = h|e1
		|, |e2
		|i
		|fst(e)| = fst(|e|)
		|snd(e)| = snd(|e|)
		|lam x. e| = lamx. |e|
		|lam x : τ. e| = lamx. |e|
		|e1
		(e2
		)| = |e1
		|(|e2
		|)
		|fix f : τ. e| = fix f. |e|
		|let x = e1
		in e2
		end| = let x = |e1
		| in |e2
		| end
		|(e : τ )| = |e|
		|λa : sˆ. e| = |e|
		|e[I]| = |e|

	- Fig. 24. The erasure function on expressions in DML0

		τ1 = Πa1 :nat. int(a1) → Σa2 :nat. int(a2)
		τ2(a) = int(a) → Σa2 :nat. int(a2)
		τ3 = Σa2 :nat. int(a2)
		e1 = ⊃−(Π−(f))(1)
		e2 = ⊃−(Π−(x1))
		e3 = let Σ(∧(x2)) = x2 in ⊃−(Π−(x1))(x2) end
		e4 = let x1 = f in let x2 = e1 in e3 end end
		D0 :: ∅; ∅; ∅, f : τ1 ` f ↑ τ1 ⇒ f
		(elab-up-var)
		D0 ∅; ∅ ` 1 : nat
		D1 :: ∅; ∅; ∅, f : τ1 ` f ↑ τ2(1) ⇒⊃−(Π−(f))
		(elab-up-Π-elim-1)
		D2 :: ∅; ∅; ∅, f : τ1 ` 1 ↑ int(1) ⇒ 1
		(elab-up-const)
		D1
		D2
		∅; ∅ |= 1
		.= 1
		∅; ∅ ` [] : int(1) ≤ int(1)
		(dy-sub-base)
		∅; ∅; ∅, f : τ1 ` 1 ↓ int(1) ⇒ 1
		(elab-dn-up)
		D3 :: ∅; ∅; ∅, f : τ1 ` f(1) ↑ τ3 ⇒ e1
		(elab-up-app-1)
		D4 :: ∅, a2 : int; ∅, a2 ≥ 0; ∅, x1 : τ1, x2 : int(a2) ` x1 ↑ τ1 ⇒ x1
		(elab-up-var)
		D4 ∅, a2 : int; ∅, a2 ≥ 0 ` a2 : nat
		D5 :: ∅, a2 : int; ∅, a2 ≥ 0; ∅, x1 : τ1, x2 : int(a2) ` x1 ↑ τ2(a2) ⇒ e2
		(elab-up-Π-elim-1)
		D6 :: ∅, a2 : int; ∅, a2 ≥ 0; ∅, x1 : τ1, x2 : int(a2) ` x2 ↑ int(a2) ⇒ x2
		(elab-up-var)
		D5
		D6
		∅, a2 : int; ∅, a2 ≥ 0 |= a2
		.
		= a2
		∅, a2 : int; ∅, a2 ≥ 0 ` [] : int(a2) ≤ int(a2)
		(dy-sub-base)
		∅, a2 : int; ∅, a2 ≥ 0; ∅, x1 : τ1, x2 : int(a2) ` x2 ↓ int(a2) ⇒ x2
		(elab-dn-up)
		∅, a2 : int; ∅, a2 ≥ 0; ∅, x1 : τ1, x2 : int(a2) ` x1(x2) ↑ τ3 ⇒ e2(x2)
		(elab-up-app-1)
		D7 :: ∅; ∅; ∅, x1 : τ1, x2 : τ3 ` x1(x2) ↑ Σa:nat. τ3 ⇒ e3
		(elab-up-Σ-left)
		D0 D3 D7
		D8 :: ∅; ∅; ∅, x1 : τ1, x2 : τ3 ` f(f(1)) ↑ Σa:nat. τ3 ⇒ e4
		(elab-up-app-2)

	- Fig. 25. An example of elaboration

	a need for an analysis elaboration judgment.

	For instance, we may encounter a situation where we need to synthesize a type for some expression lamx. e; however, there is no rule for such a synthesis as the involved expression is a lam-expression; to address the issue, the programmer may provide a type annotation by writing (lamx. e : τ ) instead; synthesizing a type for (lamx. e : τ ) is then reduced to analyzing whether lam x. e can be assigned the type τ .

	----

	The rule (elab-up-app-1) is fairly straightforward. When synthesizing a type for e1(e2), we can first synthesize a type for e1; if the type is of the form τ1 → τ2, we can then analyze whether e2 can be assigned the type τ1; if the analysis succeeds, then we claim that the type τ2 is synthesized for e2.

	----

	The rule (elab-up-app-2) is rather intricate but of great importance in practice, and we provide some explanation for it. When synthesizing a type for e1(e2), we may first synthesize a type τ for e1 that is not of the form τ1 → τ2; for instance, τ may be a universally quantified type; if this is the case, we can next synthesize a type for e2 and then apply the rule (elab-up-app-2). Let us now see a concrete example involving (elab-up-app-2). Suppose that f is given the following type:

		Πa1 :nat. int(a1) → Σa2 :nat. int(a2)
		where nat = {a : int | a ≥ 0}, and we need to elaborate the expression f(1).

	By applying the rule (elab-Π-elim-1) we can synthesize the type int(1) → Σa2 : nat. int(a2) for f; then we can analyze that 1 has the type int(1) and thus synthesize
	the type Σa2 :nat. int(a2) for f(1); note that f(1) elaborates into ⊃ −(Π−(f))(1), which can be assigned the type Σa2 : nat. int(a2).

	Now suppose that we need to elaborate the expression f(f(1)).

	If we simply synthesize a type of the form int(I) → Σa2 :nat. int(a2) for the first occurrence of f in f(f(1)), then the elaboration for f(f(1)) cannot succeed as it is impossible to elaborate f(1) into an expression in λΠ,Σ pat of the type int(I) for any type index I.

	With the rule (elab-up-app-2), we are actually able to elaborate f(f(1)) into the following expression e in λΠ,Σ pat :

		let x1 = f in let x2 =⊃−(Π−(f))(1) in e
		0 end end
		where e
		0 = let Σ(∧(x2)) = x2 in ⊃ −(Π−(x1))(x2) end.

	Please find that the entire elaboration is formally carried out in Figure 25.

	Clearly, the erasure of e is operationally equivalent to f(f(1)).

	----

	The rules (elab-up-prod-left) and (elab-up-Σ-left) are for simplifying the types assigned to variables in a dynamic context. In practice, we apply these rules during elaboration whenever possible.
