- 6.1 Parametric polymorphism
	
	We first extend the syntax of λΠ,Σ pat as follows:

		types        τ ::= ... | α
		type schemes σ ::= ∀α~. τ
		contexts     Γ ::= · | Γ, xf : σ

	where we use α to range over type variables. A c-type is now of the following form:
	
		∀α~. Πφ.P~ ⊃ (τ ⇒ (~τ )δ(~I))

	and the typing rules (ty-var) and (ty-const) are modified as follows:

		Γ(xf) = ∀α. ~ τ φ |- ~τ [type]
		------------------------------(ty-var)
		φ; P~; Γ |- xf : τ [α~ 7→ ~τ ]

		α~; φ0; P~0 |- c(τ ) : (~τ0)δ(~I0)     φ |- ~τ [type]
		φ |- Θ : φ0    φ; P~ |= P~0[Θ]    φ; P~; Γ |- e : τ [α~ |→ ~τ][Θ]
		-------------------------------------------------------------------(ty-const)
		φ; P~ ; Γ |- c(e) : (~τ0[α~ 7→ ~τ ])δ(~I0[Θ])

	We write α~; φ0; P~0 |- c(τ ) : (~τ0)δ(~I0) to indicate that the constant c is assigned the c-type ∀α~.Πφ0.P~0 ⊃ (τ ⇒ δ(~I0)), and φ |- ~τ [type] to mean that φ |- τ [type] is derivable for each τ in ~τ , and [α~ 7→ ~τ ] for a substitution that maps α~ = α1, ..., αn to ~τ = τ1, ..., τn. We now need the following static subtype rule to deal with type variables:
	
		------------------(st-sub-var)
		φ; P~ |= α ≤stp α

	In addition, the rule (st-sub-base) needs to be modified as follows:

		φ; P~ |= τ1 =stp τ'1 ··· φ; P~ |= τm =stp τ'm
		φ; P~ |= I1 .= I'1   ··· φ; P~ |= In .= I'n
		--------------------------------------------------------------------------(st-sub-base)
		φ; P~ |= (τ1, ..., τm)δ(I1, ..., In) ≤stp (τ'1, ..., τ'm)δ(I'1, ..., I'n)
		
	where for types τ and τ', τ =s tp τ' means both τ ≤stp τ' and τ' ≤stp τ hold.

	It is possible to replace τi =s tp τ' i with τi ≤stp τ' i (τ' i ≤stp τi) if δ is covariant (contravariant) with respect to its i th type argument.

	However, we do not entertain this possibility in this paper (but do so in implementation).

	----

	The following typing rules (ty-poly) and (ty-let) are introduced for handling let-polymorphism as is supported in ML:

		φ; P~ ; Γ |- e : τ α~ # Γ
		φ; P~; Γ |- e : ∀α. ~ τ
		(ty-poly)
		φ; P~ ; Γ |- e1 : σ1 φ; P~ ; Γ, x : σ1 |- e2 : σ2
		φ; P~; Γ |- let x = e1 in e2 end : σ2
		(ty-let)

	Obviously, we need to associate with the rule (ty-poly) a side condition that requires no free occurrences of α~ in Γ. This condition is written as α~ # Γ.

	----

	As usual, the type soundness of this extension is established by the subject reduction theorem and the progress theorem stated as follows:

	- Theorem 6.1 (Subject Reduction)

		Assume that D :: ∅; ∅; ∅ |- e1 : σ is derivable and e1 ,→ev e2 holds. Then ∅; ∅; ∅ |- e2 : σ is also derivable.

	- Theorem 6.2 (Progress)

	Assume that ∅; ∅; ∅ |- e1 : σ is derivable. Then there are the following possibilities:

		c(raise(v)) ,→ev raise(v)
		hraise(v), ei ,→ev raise(v)
		hv0, raise(v)i ,→ev raise(v)
		(raise(v))(e) ,→ev raise(v)
		v0(raise(v)) ,→ev raise(v)
		case raise(v) of ms ,→ev raise(v)
		let x = raise(v) in e end ,→ev raise(v)
		⊃
		−(raise(v)) ,→ev raise(v)
		Π
		−(raise(v)) ,→ev raise(v)
		let ∧(x) = raise(v) in e end ,→ev raise(v)
		let Σ(x) = raise(v) in e end ,→ev raise(v)
		try raise(v) with ms ,→ev
		
		
		
		e[θ] if match(v, p) ⇒ θ holds
		for some p ⇒ e in ms;
		raise(v) otherwise.

		Fig. 27. Additional forms of redexes and their reducts

	- e1 is a value, or
	- e1 is in M-form, or
	- e1 is in U-form, or
	- e1 ,→ev e2 holds for some expression e2.

	We omit the proofs for these two theorems, which are essentially the same as the ones for Theorem 4.11 and Theorem 4.12.
