- 7.2 Red-black trees

	We now show a typical use of dependent types in capturing certain inherent invariants in data structures.

	A red-black tree (RBT) is a balanced binary tree that satisfies the following conditions:

	1. All leaves are marked black and all other nodes are marked either red or black;
	2. for every node there are the same number of black nodes on every path connecting the node to a leaf, and this number is called the black height of the node;
	3. the two children of every red node are black.

	It is a common practice to use the RBT data structure to implement a dictionary.

	We declare a datatype in Figure 30, which precisely captures the above three properties of being a RBT.

		sort color = {a:int | 0 <= a <= 1} (* sort declaration *)
		datatype ’a rbtree (color, nat, nat) = (* color, black height, violation *)
		E(0, 0, 0)
		| {cl:color, cr:color, bh:nat}
		B(0, bh+1, 0) of ’a rbtree(cl, bh, 0) * ’a * ’a rbtree(cr, bh, 0)
		| {cl:color, cr:color, bh:nat}
		R(1, bh, cl+cr) of ’a rbtree(cl, bh, 0) * ’a * ’a rbtree(cr, bh, 0)
		fun restore (R(R(a, x, b), y, c), z, d) = R(B(a, x, b), y, B(c, z, d))
		| restore (R(a, x, R(b, y, c)), z, d) = R(B(a, x, b), y, B(c, z, d))
		| restore (a, x, R(R(b, y, c), z, d)) = R(B(a, x, b), y, B(c, z, d))
		| restore (a, x, R(b, y, R(c, z, d))) = R(B(a, x, b), y, B(c, z, d))
		| restore (a, x, b) = B(a, x, b)
		withtype {cl:color, cr:color, bh:nat, vl:nat, vr:nat | vl+vr <= 1}
		’a rbtree(cl, bh, vl) * ’a * ’a rbtree(cr, bh, vr) ->
		[c:color] ’a rbtree(c, bh+1, 0)
		exception ItemAlreadyExists
		fun insert cmp (x, t) = let
		fun ins (E) = R(E, x, E)
		| ins (B (a, y, b)) = (
		case cmp (x, y) of
		LESS => restore (ins a, y, b)
		| GREATER => restore(a, y, ins b)
		| EQUAL => raise ItemAlreadyExists
		)
		| ins (R (a, y, b)) = (
		case cmp (x, y) of
		LESS => R (ins a, y, b)
		| GREATER => R(a, y, ins b)
		| EQUAL => raise ItemAlreadyExists
		)
		withtype {c:color, bh:nat}
		’a rbtree(c, bh, 0) -> [c’:color, v:nat | v <= c] ’a rbtree(c’, bh, v)
		in case ins t of R(a, y, b) => B(a, y, b) | t => t end
		withtype {c:color, bh:nat} (’a * ’a -> ORDER) ->
		key * ’a rbtree(c, bh, 0) -> [bh’:nat] ’a rbtree(0, bh’, 0)

	Fig. 30. A red-black tree implementation

	A sort color is declared for the type index terms representing the colors of nodes.
	
	We use 0 for black and 1 for red.

	The type constructor rbtree is indexed with a triple (c, bh, v), where c, bh, v stand for the color of the node, the black height of the tree rooted at the node, and the number of color violations in the tree, respectively.

	We record one color violation if a red node is followed by another red one, and thus a valid RBT must have no color violations.

	Clearly, the types of value constructors associated with the type constructor rbtree indicate that color violations can only occur at the top node.

	Also, notice that a leaf, that is, E, is considered black.

	Given the datatype declaration and the explanation, it should be clear that the type of a RBT in which all keys are of type τ is simply:

		Σc:color.Σbh:nat. (τ )rbtree(c, bh, 0),

	that is, a RBT is a tree that has some top node color c and some black height bh but no color violations.

	It is an involved task to implement RBT.

	The implementation we present in Figure 30 is largely adopted from one in (Okasaki, 1998), though there are some minor modifications. We explain how the insertion operation on a RBT is implemented.

	Clearly, the invariant we intend to capture is that inserting an entry into a RBT yields another RBT.

	In other words, we intend to declare that the insertion operation has the following type:

		∀α.(α ∗ α → Bool) → α ∗ (α)RBT → (α)RBT

	where Bool is the type for booleans and (α)RBT is defined to be:

		Σc:color.Σbh:nat. (α)rbtree(c, bh, 0)

	If we insert an entry into a RBT, some properties on RBT may be invalidated, and the invalidated properties can then be restored through some rotation operations.
	
	The function restore in Figure 30 is defined for this purpose.
	
	The type of restore, though long, is easy to understand.

	It states that this function takes a tree with at most one color violation, an entry and a RBT, and returns a RBT.

	The two trees in the argument must have the same black height bh for some natural number bh and the black height of the returned RBT is bh + 1.

	This information can be of great help for understanding the code. It is not trivial at all to verify the information manually, and we could imagine that almost everyone who did this would appreciate the availability of a type-checker to perform it automatically.

	There is a substantial difference between type-checking a matching clause sequence in DML and in ML.

	The operational semantics of ML requires that pattern matching be performed sequentially, that is, the chosen pattern matching clause is always the first one that matches a given value.

	For instance, in the definition of the function restore, if the last clause is chosen at run-time, then we know the argument of restore does not match any one of the clauses ahead of the last one.

	This must be taken into account when we type-check pattern matching in DML. One approach is to expand patterns into disjoint ones.

	For instance, the pattern (a, x, b) expands into 36 patterns (pattern1, x, pattern2), where pattern1 and pattern2 range over the following six patterns:
		
		R(B , , B ), R(B , , E), R(E, , B ), R(E, , E), B , E
	
	Unfortunately, such an expansion may lead to combinatorial explosion.

	An alternative is to require the programmer to indicate whether such an expansion is needed.

	Neither of these was available in the original implementation of DML, and the author had to take the inconvenience to expand patterns into disjoint ones when necessary.

	Recently, we have implemented the alternative mentioned above.

	For instance, the last clause in the definition of restore can be written as follows:

		| restore (a, x, b) == B(a, x, b)

	where the special symbol == indicates to the type-checker that the pattern involved here needs to be (automatically) expanded into ones that are disjoint from the the patterns in the previous clauses.

	For a thorough study on the issue of type-checking pattern matching clauses in DML, please refer to (Xi, 2003).
	
	The complete implementation of the insertion operation follows immediately.
	
	Notice that the type of the function ins indicates that ins may return a tree with one color violation if it is applied to a tree with a red top node.

	This violation can be eliminated by replacing the top node with a black one for every returned tree with a red top node.
	
	Moreover, we can use an extra index to capture the size information of a RBT.

	If we do so, we can then show that the insert function always returns a RBT of size n+1 when given a RBT of size n (note that an exception is raised if the entry to be inserted already exists in the tree).

	A complete implementation of red-black trees is available on-line (Xi, 2005), which includes deletion and join operations as well.

	Also, several examples that make use of dependent types in capturing invariants in other data structures (e.g., Braun trees, random-access lists, binomial heaps) can be found in (Xi, 1999).
	
	We point out that it is also possible to capture the invariants of being a RBT by using nested datatypes (Kahrs, 2001).

	This is a rather different approach as it, to a large extent, employs run-time checking (in the form of pattern matching) to ensure that a binary tree meets the criteria of being a red-black tree.

	The use of nested datatypes essentially guarantees the adequacy of such run-time checking.

	A more systematic study on making use of nested types in capturing program invariants can be found in (Hinze, 2001).
